1934, Bennett Cerf and Donald Crawford put the Great Gaspers and Martin Harbury.
Discontinued title.
They couldn't sell it yet, 95 cents.
More evidence.
As I've tried to leave the game, God, I hate the rich in chat.
It cheapens literature.
It substitutes gossip for history.
The book was so worthless that in 1937, the general was delighted to sell
Sunday's magazine.
Newspaper.
Right.
Maybe he got $75.
Maybe.
So when did the great renaissance, when is he recognized?
At what point?
The first step is 1945, the publication of the crack-up.
Hasn't.
Good reception.
Same year, two things happened.
Number one, it appears in paperback at 25 cents.
This is not the paperback.
Yes, it is.
It appears in paperback at 25 cents, and this would be interesting if for no other reason than it's got a paperback with a jacket.
Could I tell you something?
It appears 25 cents.
It was one of the first 10 banters.
When Bantam began in 1945, they gave them 10 titles.
This is one of the first 10.
This makes it affordable at 25 cents.
And at the same time, at the end of World War II, it appears in the armed services editions.
Which I understand you're collecting now.
We are 20 short of the complete
collection.
We know of no one who has built a complete and erect collection.
There are allegedly two complete collections which were given at the time.
No one has ever succeeded in reconstructing them.
In 1945, 50,000 copies of this were given away.
50,000 given away to kids who never had the time or the inclination to read before.
There they were sitting on some godforsaken island in the Pacific with nothing to do except jack off and read.
The ones who didn't jack off read.
Do you think they read it?
Yes.
Do you think this had anything to do with his burgeoning reputation?
Yes, I just said so.
Have you ever heard me tell you a lie?
They came back to the United States, not some of them, but stateside.
And they remembered.
They remembered having read it.
Jim Dickey, the James Dickey movies across the hall.
Jim Dickey remembers reading the Arms Services editions.
Who selected the titles for them, do you think?
Well, it was chaired by Philip Van Doren Stern, a publishing figure best known as the author of the short story from which the Christmas movie
A wonderful life.
So was he trying to entertain the troops?
Was he trying to enlighten them?
Was he trying to instruct them?
The publishers wanted to do something patriotic.
I don't know if you were around.
I was around.
Everybody wanted to do something patriotic.
So the publishing industry said our contribution to the war effort would be the armed service editions.
They formed a committee to pick the books.
Jesus, I'd love to have the minutes of the committee.
How much...
wheeling and dealing went on, you know, because this was a chance to promote their own authors.
They formed a committee of publishers to pick the books.
Van Doren Stern was the honcho.
He ran the operation.
I think that their intention was entertainment, because easily half the books were sports books, mystery books, westerns.
damn westerns and the sports books are the hardest ones to find.
Why do you suppose?
Because they were popular and read to pieces.
One of the ones I lack is a biography of Bob Feller.
I think that will be the last one I get.
The next and the last one will be a Zane Gray.
Do you ever see them?
Do you go eBaying?
When I see them, I buy them.
Do you know John Hench of the American American Society?
John's doing a collection.
It's not meant, I think, to be comprehensive.
There are roughly 1,200 separate titles, and we've got about 1,010.
How long have you been doing it?
Since the day Mr. Wyllie.
Oh, since a while.
Mr. Wyllie showed me my first armed services edition in 1954.
Oh, so you've been at it for a while.
Mr. Wyllie was the Grab Books curator at the University of Virginia.
He was the best bookman I've ever known in my life.
Everything I am, everything I've done, everything I hope to be as a bookman, I owe to Mr. Wyllie's training.
So how does a person like that inspire you?
Yes, ma'am.
Excuse me, Carol is on the phone.
She has Cassandra on the phone for me.
If you'd like to do a quick content call, please.
Who the hell is Cassandra?
Um, she's, it relates to insurance.
Beg your pardon?
It relates to an exam and insurance.
Oh, I've got to take an exam and insurance.
Excuse me.
Look around.
Peace out.
I'll be back.
This room is fabulous.
Isn't it great?
Yeah.
Well, I hope after I transcribe this tape and get some good idea of where I'm going, I'd like to talk again, if that would be.
Of course.
Wall, that's fabulous wall back here.
Those are the abouts.
But with you in it.
Well, this section over here, maybe both.
I mean, there's plenty of film.
I think this is more interesting.
This is the material that you said, just pick a... It's the show's library card, for example.
I'll cut the one going into this section like this.
Excellent, excellent, excellent.
Well, we covered a lot.
This was a bibliography.
We did a bibliography three, four years ago.
More than that, 1997, we did a bibliography of the catalog of the collection.
Not a bibliography, a catalog of the collection, and I wasn't satisfied with it.
So, we are publishing, later this year, a two-volume catalog of the collection, profusely illustrated.
We're going to illustrate every inscription in the collection, and as many manuscripts and letters as we can.
Because when you flip page, you'll never see what you're looking for.
And the university will be publishing it?
It will be co-publication.
University of South Carolina Press for the Thomas Cooper Library.
Excellent.
I think that what you've done as a collector, as a scholar, there aren't many people who combine all of these passions into one package and who uses it all so... I've been lucky.
If you don't believe in luck, you're a goddamn fool.
I've been lucky.
You told me you went to the auction
It was luck.
I'm not sure.
You said, there's no such thing as luck in collecting.
I like that line.
I was called, Fraser Cough, my partner, always used to say, it's all about paying attention.
The ones who pay attention get the books.
However, when Elizabeth came in to tell me I was wanted on the phone, you were asking me about John Cook Wyllie.
W-Y-L-L-I-E.
who was curator of rare books at the University of South Carolina.
I'm sorry, the University of Virginia Alderman Library.
John Cook Wyllie, curator of rare books, Alderman Library, University of Virginia.
I met him in 1954, and that was the precise moment at which I knew what I wanted to do with the rest of my life.
What was there about him or the example that he set that was such an epiphany for you?
Mr. Wyllie knew more about books and literature than anyone I'd ever met before or since.
And as Mr. Wyllie spent time with me, he'd set projects for me.
I never took a course with him because he didn't teach, but he was the greatest teacher I ever had, because as long as I was around him, which was almost seven years, he'd keep inventing projects for me.
For example, when Virginia got the Hinman collating machine, I did the first collation of a modern book on, it was at Scott Pichel's This Side of Paradise.
I did the first collation of a modern book on the hymn and collating machine, because Mr. Wyllie suggested it.
He never gave me an order.
He never told me to do anything.
But he thought it was something that was worthwhile to you.
He would mention interesting projects.
But mainly, he would show me things.
He showed me my first armed services.
I don't know what the hell it was.
He showed me my first armed services edition.
And I began realizing that these things are rarer and getting rarer by the day.
You can still get them now, but the time is going to come when you can't get them.
And moreover, I began asking the question, how did the inclusion of certain books and certain authors in the greatest cultural giveaway in history do simple arithmetic, never mind 1,200 titles,
Say 1,000 titles and 50,000 copies each.
I think you get 500 million.
If you don't get 500 million, you get 50 million.
I can't keep the zeros in my head.
But it was the greatest book giveaway since Gutenberg produced the Bible, which he didn't give away.
And Mr. Wyllie showed me, I don't know which one, showed me an Armed Services edition.
Didn't they do something like that in the First World War?
No, no.
The Brits did.
And I'm surprised Mr. Patrick Scott didn't show it to you.
The Brits did in newspaper format.
Excerpts from classic English lit, which came with an envelope.
And you could mail it to the soldiers at the front, who presumably were sitting in the trenches reading Milton and Shakespeare.
Well, presumably.
Oh, it's a lovely thing.
Maybe before you leave, you get Patrick to show you.
We have that complete.
We've got the complete World War I London Times set of readers and the envelopes.
So did Wyllie, would you regard him as a mentor for you?
More than that.
I told you, everything I have done, everything I will ever do.
Was he mindfully assuming the role of mentor?
I mean, did you think he kind of picked you on as a... I picked him out.
What a story.
What's the first book that made you, that you acquired with the knowledge that you were acquiring something special beyond the text?
that it had value, and I don't mean dollars and cents, but I mean as a cultural artifact that you were acquiring for purposes beyond the reading of the book.
The week of my graduation from Yale, in the basement of Whitlock's, which was a textbook store in New Haven, in the basement they had used books, and I found two Fitzgeralds in the basement.
One was $5, one was $750, under $10.
And those would be the first books I bought for their bibliophilic appeal.
And so you knew with that, if you didn't know it before that, beforehand, you knew then you're acquiring... Yes.
By the time I graduated,
I knew I was going to Yale.
I knew I was going to specialize on an author.
And I thought it would be Hemingway.
But my favorite teacher at Yale was Charles Fenton, who wrote the book about Hemingway's journalism.
And I figured out that I could never compete with Mr. Fenton.
So instead of Hemingway, I chose Fitzgerald, which was a fortunate move.
because I had almost no competition for Fitzgerald, and already the Hemingway field was crowded, and because I think I bring certain equipment to the study of Fitzgerald that perhaps other people do not have.
But anyhow, that decision made for the wrong reason.
Well, Mr. Fenton is doing Hemingway, so I'll do something else.
Turned out again to be another stroke of luck.
And I began buying books, but... And then you become a publisher.
What's the motivation to be a publisher?
It can't be a commercial... Well, the name Fraser Clark keeps coming up.
C.E.
Fraser Clark, Jr., Fraser Clark, who was the greatest Hawthorne collective who ever lived.
And I agreed that...
There were reference tools, especially bibliographies and checklists, needed for the study of literature, for the collecting of literature, and they didn't exist.
Or if they existed, they weren't good enough.
So, Fraser and I both borrowed on our insurance policies.
It's a miracle our insurance policies didn't wear out, because we borrowed on them so frequently.
We borrowed our insurance money, and we began publishing checklists.
Then we began publishing collector's editions or limited editions from books in our collections.
And the phrase, who lived in Detroit, was a good friend to a man named Frederick Ruffner,
I know I've met Mr. Ruffner.
Who owned, who founded and owned Gale.
Gale, yeah.
And Mr. Ruffner began asking us for advice about publishing reference books.
And finally the day came when we became an imprint within the Gale empire.
He made a ton of money on Gale.
Sure he did.
Yeah, well, I'm popular to him.
I do a thing in Fort Lauderdale where they have authors now, and he was the host at his home.
He's made a lot of money out of books, and he's put a lot back.
Yeah, he's a sweet man.
Very nice man.
And because of my friendship with Freyze and Freyze's friendship with Mr. Ruffner, we became the Brooklyn Clark imprint.
Freese was far more adventurous than I was.
Freese was a gambler.
Freese loved to take chances.
Are you a gambler?
You're not.
No, I'm a very cautious and conservative man.
I don't talk like it, but I am.
Well, see, you don't regard acquisitions like some of the spectacular ones that you've done as a role in the dance.
It's a short thing, in your view.
Of course.
Interesting.
No risk, no gamble, no chance.
How the hell can you go wrong on a Gatsby?
Oh, and along the way, I met a wonderful man, Charles Feinberg.
You ever heard of him?
No.
Charlie Feinberg was the man who built the greatest Whitman collection the world has ever known and placed it at the Library of Congress.
I first met Charlie, when Mr. Wyllie used to bring bookmen, book collectors, into the University of Virginia to talk to students.
And Charlie Feinberg came to talk about collecting Whitman.
I didn't know who the hell he was, but he described how, as a poor boy in Canada, he used to shine shoes in the street, a shoe shine box, and with the nickels.
He would go to a bookstore and read the nickels.
leave the nickels, until he had fifty cents or seventy-five cents, and then he could buy a Whitman.
And that moved me deeply.
What was there about Whitman that was driving this kid to... Oh, he said... What was it that resonated with this kid?
He grew up in a Jewish Orthodox household, and he said, reading Whitman was like reading the Torah, the scriptures.
Wow.
Anyhow, Charlie, who was 25, 30 years older than I, and I became devoted friends.
And Charlie said to me, Matt, if you've never seen it before, buy it.
You may never see it again.
And two, Matt, it costs more today than it cost yesterday.
But tomorrow it'll cost even more.
Buy it.
And those two rules.
That's good rules, Edward.
I think of all the books I could have had 20 years ago.
The only ones you regret are the ones you don't buy.
You never regret buying a book, and you never pay too much for a book.
No matter what you pay, you can't overpay for a book.
Assuming it's a good book, obviously.
But that's where judgment is.
Charles Feinberg was a great bookman, and he was a great American.
He came here as a penniless orphan boy.
No, he wasn't an orphan.
He came here as a penniless immigrant boy, and he built this great, great library, which he turned over to the Library of Congress.
And how did he make his fortune at some point?
Sure.
He came here penniless.
So what was his profession?
Speedway Oil.
Was he formally educated, or did he just...?
No, grammar school education.
And Whitman did something.
Were there any other authors, or was there Whitman?
Robert Frost.
A big Robert Frost collection.
He knew Robert Frost.
Plus poetry.
Poetry.
Ann Whitman was his two greatest loves.
And I adored Charlie because I'm a sucker for American success stories.
My father was an American success story.
He was a shoeshine.
He was a nice shoeshine boy.
He was a stable boy.
And he went from stable boy to be able to afford me.
And I have to tell you, that's a great climb up in the world.
Because most of my father's life was a struggle to make money faster than I could spend it.
And he managed to keep a little ahead of me.
That's true, by the way.
That's a great story.
My father was brought up in a Protestant orphanage.
He was a kid of the streets.
He died this last year at 91.
And the pole brought a wonderful open on him.
I helped him with it.
He was a wrestler during prohibition.
All of these, you talk about these American success stories.
There you go.
It was just one of these inspirational.
I'd love to get a picture of you with the Fitzgerald briefcase, if I may.
What did he do with it?
He had it this morning with the little group.
He said, everybody in my life.
He said, I've had fun.
Christ, if I had fun.
Everybody, except for my parents.
But including my wife, who's been closest to me, most valuable to me, most precious to me, was Book Connected.
When I married in 1957, I really became a book collector, because I had a home for the first time, and I proceeded to spend our eating money
our food money, our rent money on books, and Arlen never once said, how are you going to pay for it?
You can't afford it.
She never said, I want a fur coat instead.
I want clothing instead of your books.
But did she share the passion?
Yeah, with her, Jane Austen.
When we were poor students, we were in Providence, Rhode Island, and she saw this, which I didn't have,
And she bought it for $10, which happened to be our eating money.
She blew our eating money on a copy of Taps It, Reveille, and Dust Jacket.
For $10.
God bless her.
I saw the Zelda stuff, by the way, the paintings.
Fantastic.
That woman had really, I think, professional talent.
It is not a gesture of...
marriage devotion.
Her name is on the collection because without Arlen, there would not have been this collection.
I could not have done it without her approval.
There's a woman who stayed home while I traveled all over the world buying books, looking for books.
She stayed home with the children.
I traveled.
That resonates with me in ways that you can't... I got it.
That was good.
That was a good catch.
You can't imagine.
When I was quitting my job as a newspaper man... Well, you still have a column, don't you?
I gave it up.
Spent his time at Princeton Wright.
And it was extraordinary for a freshman to write the Triangle Club show.
The first Triangle Club show that he wrote was Five Five Fee Fee.
which was published as a kind of souvenir libretto which they sold to performances.
This is the acting script printed for the cast.
There are two of them in the world.
Princeton has one.
We have one.
Our copy has the extra lyrics by F. Scott Fitzgerald.
And where are you finding these things?
I wrote to every surviving
member of the classes of 1917, 1916, 1915, 1914, saying, I would not presume to offer you money, but if you have any material relating to the Triangle Club productions for 1914, 15, and 16, I would be very happy to make a generous donation to Princeton University in your name.
It worked.
Any other collecting stories like that from writing people?
Uh... Yeah.
Uh...
One day, I was working at Princeton, and there was his scrapbook, and it had a front page of a parody newspaper called the St.
Paul Daily Dirge that Fitzgerald had written and had printed and passed out of the dance as a gag.
God, I wanted one.
Princeton didn't even have one.
They had the part of the front page pasted in the scrapbook.
And I got hold of a Minneapolis phone book and a St.
Paul phone book.
And I wrote to every name that had a Fitzgerald connection.
And I wrote and I wrote and I wrote.
And finally, somebody said, yes, I've got one.
mint condition, which I bought, and it's probably in the Fitzgerald room, because I don't see it here.
I would call that a case of rescuing something, too.
Isn't that what a collector does?
Yeah, really.
He rescues, he preserves.
Rescue, preserve, and pass on.
Oftentimes, the obvious thing
is what works.
It doesn't take a lot of brains to write the same letter and mail it to 50, 100 people.
Well, but it takes a lot of time, and you have to go find who all these people are.
It's not just writing and posting a letter.
It's determining who they are, getting their addresses.
I'll tell you what's really dazzled me in my trip here.
I've never seen, and I really have, an institution with active people like yourself who are collectors and who actually have worked
synergistically to build collections at an institution.
Is there something in the water town here in South Carolina that has produced this kind of delightful alchemy?
Well, Ross Roy was here before I came, and you spoke to him, and you know how he became a collector.
I was a collector before I came here, and to my great dismay,
When I came here, I discovered the head librarian was a bitter enemy of books, and discouraged acquisition of material.
He's the one who refused, quote, to give shelf space to James Dickey, quote.
And I can attest to that, because I'm the one the son of a bitch said it to.
And for a good twenty years,
All I could do was collect for myself, because there was no institutional support at all.
And Ross Roy collected by himself at home.
I collected by myself at home.
Joel Myerson, who came a couple of years after I did, was building his American Renaissance, a really transcendentalist collection, not to the library.
because he needed it for his scholarship.
I needed my books for my scholarship.
I've been called intolerant, which strikes me as a vile slander.
I'll be goddamned if I can understand how people can do serious scholarship or serious teaching without access to the key books and without owning the key books themselves.
And I regarded building my collections and, you know, every one of my bibliographies, my James Gou Cousins bibliography, my Ross McDonnell bibliography, my Ring Lordner bibliography, my John O'Hara bibliography, every one of them was compiled only after I had built the collection.
That's amazing.
I regarded book collecting as the obligatory and mandatory occupation of a scholar.
I repeat, I don't know how these other sons of bitches can claim to be scholars when they don't have access and don't want, as near as I can tell, access to
the great books in their field, the key works in their fields.
I can understand why for one reason or another, family responsibilities, improperly trained wives.
I think the most important decision a book collector makes in his life is not what to collect, but picking the wife who's not going to interfere.
I think my wife also knew.
You met her last night, a smart woman.
She was smart enough to understand, never to make me choose between the books and her.
And she never has.
I'm not saying how it would have come out.
It's just an unbelievable quote.
I mean, I have no idea.
It would have been a close thing.
It would have been a very close thing.
And... Don't move, don't move.
I just like that.
I did.
I formed my collections.
You know, the Fitzgerald is one of a dozen.
It's the best, but it's one of a dozen.
I formed my collections because I needed them in order to write books, compile bibliographies, and work on this lifelong concern with the profession of authorship in America.
How did American authors live?
How did American authors write?
What was the relationship between American authors and their readers, their editors, their publishers?
And you've been here since 1960?
I came here in 1969.
So it's 25 years for you.
No, 34.
Wow, man.
That's terrible.
34.
35.
Going on 35.
Well, this is the four.
We're into the four already.
Yeah, but it's early in the four.
I came here in September.
I came here in the summer, I guess, of 1969.
This will be your 35th year here.
Will be.
Wow.
This is good stuff.
I'll be back in touch with you.
And for the first 20 years, I wasn't allowed to buy a book for the library.
If that incompetent lunatic who impeded me,
hadn't squandered 20 years of my work by preventing me for 20 years from acquiring collections for the library, holy jumping Christ would we have a great research collection here.
Well, you do, but you do.
Well, we have now an almost great.
So, I mean, I'm going to go off into a whole other tangent, but what directions would you have really gone?
Where would you have gone?
After who?
I would have worked backwards.
We have a hole in the last twenty years of the nineteenth century, the first ten years of the twentieth century, the whole period of the realists and naturalists.
That's what Patrick was saying, that there's a crane collection.
I would have worked backwards.
I did have a superb crane collection.
and the university had no interest in it, and I sold it at auction at Swan.
Hmm.
Too bad.
Yes, too bad.
I wish I had.
I had a Maggie.
Oh, Maggie for all the streets.
I did my senior thesis on Crane at Bates.
Good for you.
But in Journalist, that's one of which traces journalism, the impact of his journal, well, out of Imperfect, whether there's nothing at Bates.
I worked with Fred Bowers on the Crane edition.
Sure.
I was respectful of Crane before we began, and I came out of it even more respectful of Crane.
He burned himself up, though, didn't he, at the age of 29.
There was tuberculosis.
Well, the demon rub, too, didn't help.
No.
There's no record of Crane being an alcoholic.
He drank, but no record at all of alcoholism.
It was TB.
TB.
Okay.
Listen, Patrick's got to take me back because I have to get changed.
War One collection is... It's named for my father.
So therefore, it has a special meaning for me.
And what started you on that now?
Is this a parallel... Crazy.
When I was a child, on November 11th, every year that was,
And my father used to take me to the parade with his medals pinned to my jacket.
And when my father, he was very proud of his war record.
He had a metal plate in his head.
Came back from France, a metal plate in his head.
And when he died in the year 1965,
I went to Mr. Wyllie, and I said I wanted to do a memorial for my father, and Mr. Wyllie and I planned the Joseph M. Brookley Great War Collection at the University of Virginia, and after Mr. Wyllie subsequently died, and after enduring the ingratitude, the insults, and the abuse of his successors,
I attempted to buy back the collection that I had given to Virginia to give it to South Carolina.
And, of course, the president of the University of Virginia said, out of the question, and, of course, being what I am, I said, all right, you son of a bitch, I am going to build a far greater, far more valuable World War I collection named for my father
at the University of South Carolina.
So my father is the only man I've ever heard of who has two major collections in the same field named for him.
That's great.
The one here is better than the one in Virginia.
Well, wouldn't it be nice if you could unite them?
Does it replicate?
I tried.
Is it replicative?
Not a hell of a lot.
Inevitably, you know.
Obviously, there are going to be some essential overlaps.
surprisingly little overlap, and this collection is already better, richer than the Virginia collection, and if I can manage not to die for ten years, I think I'll have a
A fair claim to saying it's the best World War I collection in America.
Amazing how much stuff is out there.
And this is stuff, obviously, such, is it all graphic stuff?
Is it all graphic stuff?
No, no.
So, it's artifactual, and... You know, we have 135 posters, and, you know, the posters are eye-catching, but mainly it's the literature of World War I.
especially the poetry of World War I. The poor bastards wrote poems in the trenches and died the next day.
Now, are we talking about?
British and American.
Yeah, British.
Mostly British.
Yeah, it has to be their poetry.
A great deal of aviation literature was the first air war.
Which must be very exciting stuff, yeah.
You can't send that kid up in a crate like that.
the immortal line from World War I picture.
Sir, thank you.
Thank you for coming.
Come on back.